           SENILEDIUG
TNERRUC
 ELUDOM

Module 8:
 4. State the FITT recommendations post treatment for cardiorespiratory, muscle strength and endurance and flexibility.
5. Design programs with exercise adaptation, progressions and regressions for someone affected by cancer.
6. Identify the evidence- based FITT recommendations for specific outcomes (e.g., fatigue, lymphedema).
  SEMOCTUO GNINRAEL
1. Distinguish different goals depending on where your client is on the cancer trajectory.
2. Identify the principles of exercise prescription with reference to FITT and how they should be applied to PLWBC.
3. State the FITT recommendations during cancer treatment for cardiorespiratory, muscle strength and endurance and flexibility.
      
 Module 8: Online Resources
 Nutrition and Physical Activity Guidelines for Cancer Survivors
https://www.cancer.org/cancer/sur vivorship/be-healthy-after- treatment/physical-activity-and- the-cancer-patient.html
Relevant Research Papers
Campbell, K. L., K. M. Winters-Stone, J. Wiskemann, A. M. May, A. L. Schwartz, K. S. Courneya, D. S. Zucker, C. E. Matthews, J. A. Ligibel, L. H. Gerber, G. S. Morris, A. V. Patel, T. F. Hue, F. M. Perna, and K. H. Schmitz. 2019. 'Exercise Guidelines for Cancer Survivors: Consensus Statement from International Multidisciplinary Roundtable', Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 51: 2375-90.
Hayes, S. C., R. U. Newton, R. R. Spence, and D. A. Galvao. 2019. 'The Exercise and Sports Science Australia position statement: Exercise medicine in cancer management', Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport, 22: 1175-99.
Ligibel, J. A., K. Bohlke, A. M. May, S. K. Clinton, W. Demark-Wahnefried, S. C. Gilchrist, M. L. Irwin, M. Late, S. Mansfield, T. F. Marshall, J. A. Meyerhardt, C. A. Thomson, W. A. Wood, and C. M. Alfano. 2022. 'Exercise, Diet, and Weight Management During Cancer Treatment: ASCO Guideline', Journal of Clinical Oncology, 40: 2491-507.
'Nutrition and Physical Activity Guideline for Cancer Survivors'. 2022. CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians, 72: 263-65.
      
 Module 8: PowerPoint Slides
     American College
Sports Medicine
Exercise Oncology Course
American Cancer Society
Module 8: Current Guidelines
   of
         1
    Current Guidelines for Exercise Prescription
             2
 Goals of Exercise / Physical Activity Program
      1.
Improve functional status prior to treatment or prevent functional decline during cancer treatment
2.
Address treatment- specific side effects during and following cancer treatment
3. Optimize general health in the recovery period following cancer treatment
             3
1

  Goals of PA Program 1 Improve functional status prior to treatment or
prevent/attenuate functional decline during treatment:
• Maintain/optimize cardiorespiratory function
• Maintain/optimize muscle mass (lean body mass) and
strength
• Maintain joint range of motion/muscle/connective
tissue length
• During treatment – the goal may be to lessen the decline in functioning
            4
 Goals of PA Program 2 Address treatment-induced impairments during and following
treatment: (go through the complete list for all treatments)
• Fatigue
• Muscular weakness
• Cardiorespiratory fitness
• Limited ROM/Balance
• Lymphedema
• Quality of Life/Wellbeing
• Depression/Anxiety
• Deficits in joint range of motion
• Chemotherapy-induced Peripheral Neuropathy (CIPN)
• Self-efficacy (Confidence)
• Bone: osteopenia, osteoporosis
• Steroid-induced cardiomyopathy
          5
 Goals of PA Program 3 Optimize general health in the recovery period following cancer
treatment:
• Improvephysicalfunctioning
• Improvecardiorespiratoryfitness • Improvebodycomposition:
Øreduce fat mass, increase lean body mass
Ømaintain bone health
• Improvemuscularstrength
• Improvemuscularendurance • Improveflexibility
• Generalhealthpromotion
          6
2

    Current Guidelines for exercise prescription with cancer survivors
But... is it safe?
   Exercise is safe both during and after most types of cancer treatment.
           7
 Activity Recommendations
• Exercise can be safely performed during and after cancer treatment if individual limitations are considered.
• All cancer survivors, including those with existing disease or who are undergoing difficult treatments, should be encouraged, at a minimum, to avoid being sedentary.
• Unless advised otherwise, follow the physical
activity guidelines provided for the general population.
          8
 Core Components of Exercise Prescription: Mode
• Choose aerobic, resistance, flexibility mode determined by client’s
needs and goals
• Early stages of exercise with deconditioned clients – patient preferences and resources must be considered
• Aerobic options
• Resistance options • Flexibility options
• Very frail or end-of-life clients
• Risk vs benefit
            9
3

  Core Components of Exercise Prescription:
Intensity
• Low, moderate or high option
• Help clients understand intensity • Different intensity sessions e.g.,
• Interval training
• Impact loading
• Explosive, dynamic training • Hi lo
Paternostro Bayles, M. 2024. ACSM’s Exercise Testing and Prescription (Wolters Kluwer). https://maximizepotentialtx.com/uncategorized/the-rating-of-perceived-exertion-rpe- scale
            10
 Core Components of Exercise Prescription:
Frequency and Duration / Total Exercise Dosage/Volume
• Duration of an exercise session will influence frequency of sessions per week
• Deconditioned patients – 2 to 10 min short bouts 20 mins
• Why 20 minutes?
• Total exercise dosage:
• Over a defined period
• Use initial assessment of current exercise to determine dose • Some clients will never reach recommended dose
• Weekly dosage and periodization
• Flexibility of dose during active treatment
         11
 Core Components of Exercise Prescription:
Progression
• Depends on stage of treatment – pre, during or post • Progression is not always linear
• Post treatment with curative intent
• Goal of progression
• Regular exercisers • Overtraining
• Sedentary clients
         12
4

  Weekly Exercise Prescription FITT Guidelines
• Mode: Aerobic, resistance and flexibility
• Intensity – aim for at least moderate intensity
• Frequency and duration – accrued depending on patient driven goals and exercise consideration
          13
 Current Guidelines – FITT DURING Cancer Treatment (Surgery, Chemotherapy and Radiation Therapy)
     Exercise to tolerance – body feels energized not wiped out!
MSE – 2/ week
Aim for CV -3-5/wk, 10-30 minutes, (RPE 11-14) [walking will most likely meet this prescription.]
Flexibility/ROM – Progression is not on most days always linear
Depends on fitness and treatment side effects.
NB – % HR max or HRR – resting heart rate may be +10-15bpm
  during treatment
Some clients CAN work at vigorous intensity during treatment
         14
 Recommendations Post Treatment
• Individualize the program based on information gathered from exercise testing.
• Consider needs, goals and exercise preferences of the survivor.
• Identify any potential barriers to exercise including long-term treatment and disease-related side effects that may compromise ability to exercise.
         15
5

  Recommendations Post Treatment
• Consider the principles of exercise prescription: Specificity, Progression, Overload, Reversibility and Tedium (SPORT).
• Set prescription variables for components of exercise program (e.g., frequency, intensity, type and time - FITT).
• Re-evaluate and modify program to address changes in medical status, physical fitness and functioning and consider new goals (progression and regression).
          16
 ACSM Guidelines for Early-Stage Cancer Patients And Survivors Post Treatment
Aerobic Exercise
Type: Exercises involving large muscle groups, e.g., walking, because they are safe and tolerable for patients. As function and fitness improves, variations in aerobic mode will probably be needed to achieve physiological and functional benefits.
Frequency: At least 3-5 times/wk, but daily exercise may be preferable for deconditioned patients who do lighter intensity and shorter duration exercises.
Intensity: Moderate, depending on current fitness level and medical treatments. Guidelines recommend intensity, e.g., 40% to 60% HR reserve, 50% to 70% HR max, or an RPE of 11 to 14. If low intensity is preferred, total duration may need to be extended.
          17
 ACSM Guidelines for Early-Stage Cancer Patients And Survivors Post Treatment
Aerobic Exercise
Duration: At least 20-30 min of continuous exercise; however, deconditioned patients or those experiencing severe side effects of treatment may need to combine short exercise bouts (e.g., 3-5 min) with long rest intervals.
Progression: Patients should meet frequency and duration goals before they increase exercise intensity. Progression should be excluded for those who are experiencing severe side effects of treatment or slower and should be more gradual for deconditioned patients.
          18
6

  ACSM Guidelines for Early-Stage Cancer Patients And Survivors Post Treatment
Resistance Exercise
Mode:
Dynamic exercises using concentric and eccentric muscle contractions or combination of dynamic and isometric exercises. Use machine weights, free weights, body weight and / or resistance bands that involve major lower and upper body muscle groups and / or exercises that target specific muscle groups adversely influenced by treatment and now affecting ADL.
Frequency: 2-3 days/week
• Min of 48 hours between sessions or exercising same
muscle group
• Duration – ≥1 set, ≥8 reps per set, ≥60s rest between
sets
           19
 ACSM Guidelines for Early-Stage Cancer Patients And Survivors Post Treatment
Resistance Exercise
Intensity:
• 60%-80% 1RM or allow for 6-15 reps. Increase weight when reps ≥ 15
• 8-10 exercises of major muscle groups; machines or free weights
• Min of one set of 8-12 reps of all the major muscles groups
• For beginners start with increasing reps rather than resistance
• Start with long recovery rest times between exercises sets and sessions
• When / if performing > sessions per week, split programming to
accommodate necessary rest period. Moderate to high intensity is
recommended with high-volume load (sets x reps x load) to optimize muscle hypertrophy
          20
 ACSM Guidelines for Early-Stage Cancer Patients and Survivors Post Treatment
Flexibility / ROM Exercise
• Set of exercises to progressively increase ROM in a joint or lengthen shortened muscles
• Exercises should meet the needs of the individual – stretching up, putting on socks
• Address cancer treatment deficits (surgery, stiff joints)
          21
7

  ACSM Guidelines for Early-Stage Cancer Patients and Survivors Post Treatment
Flexibility / ROM Exercise
• 2-3 days / week up to daily
• Intensity – stretch within limits of pain to the point of tightness or slight discomfort
• Hold each stretch for 10-30 seconds
• Static stretches (passive and/or active) for all major muscle tendon groups. Tai chi and yoga may be preferred.
           22
 Progression, Periodization, Autoregulation
• FITT can be varied within a week, over time and over cycles
• Patients with no contraindications – progressive overload can occur. But take progression slower and more gradual for deconditioned patients or those who are at risk of exacerbating or developing treatment-related side effects such as lymphedema, fatigue, and nausea. Doing too much brings risk of disengagement or injury.
• FITT flexible to allow autoregulation based on cancer specific considerations
         23
 Stage of Treatment and Approach to Progression
Stage of treatment
 Approach to progression
 Considerations
 Prehab
 Linear
 Aim is to improve CRF
 Post surgery period
Increasing ADLs
Need to ensure full healing FITT as tolerated
Active treatment (Ch/RT)
As tolerated, non-linear approach
FITT as tolerated
Ongoing (maintenance) treatment (HT/TT/BT)
Linear approach
Consider SEs and consequences of
completed active treatment and potential future issues
Completed treatment
Linear approach
Consider ongoing consequences and potential future issues
Advanced/palliative
As tolerated, maintenance or
linear depending on responses to treatment and fitness level
Prioritize quality of life FITT as tolerated
              24
8

  Formative Assessment
17
         25
    New Guidelines for SPECIFIC Health Outcomes
             26
 Effects of Exercise on Health-Related Outcomes in Those with Cancer
What can exercise do?
• Prevention of 7 common cancers*
Dose: 2018 Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans: 150-300 min/week moderate or 75-150 min/week vigorous aerobic exercise
• Survival of 3 common cancers**
DOovseera: lEl xmaocrtedaocsetivoitfypahpypsiecarlsatoctilveiatydnteoebdetdtertorirsekdruecdeuctaionncer-specific or all-cause mortality is not yet known;
*bladder, breast, colon, endometrial, esophageal, kidney and stomach cancers **breast, colon and prostate cancers
 Overall, avoid inactivity, and to improve general health, aim to achieve the current physical activity guidelines for health (150 min/week aerobic exercise and 2x/week strength training).
 Outcome Strong Evidence
Cancer-related fatigue
Health-related quality of life
Physical Function Anxiety Depression Lymphedema
Moderate Evidence Bone health
Sleep
Aerobic Only
Dose
3x/week for 30 min per session of moderate intensity
2m-o3dxe/rawteetok fvoigr o3r0o-u6s0 min per session of 3x/week for 30-60 min per session of
moderate to vigorous
3x/week for 30-60 min per session of moderate to vigorous
3x/week for 30-60 min per session of moderate to vigorous
Insufficient evidence
Insufficient evidence
3-4x/week for 30-40 min per session of moderate intensity
Resistance Only
Dose
2x/week of 2 sets of 12-15 reps
for major muscle groups at moderate intensity
2mxa/jowremeukscolfe2gsroeutsposfa8t-a15moredpesrafoter to vigorous intensity
2-3x/week of 2 sets of 8-12 reps for major muscle groups at moderate to vigorous intensity
Insufficient evidence
Insufficient evidence
2-3x/week of progressive, supervised, program for major muscle groups does not exacerbate lymphedema
2-3x/week of moderate to vigorous resistance training plus high impact training (sufficient to generate ground reaction force of 3-4 time body weight) for at least 12 months
Insufficient evidence
Combination (Aerobic + Resistance)
Dose
3x/week for 30 min per session of moderate aerobic exercise, plus 2x/week of resistance training 2 sets of 12-15 reps for major muscle groups at moderate intensity
2-x3/xw/eweekeokf froersi2s0ta-n3c0e mtraininpinegr s2esseiotsnoof f8m-1o5dereraptse faoer rmobaijcoremxeurscisle gprlouus ps at moderate to vigorous intensity
3x/week for 20-40 min per session of moderate to vigorous aerobic exercise, plus 2-3x/week of resistance training 2 sets of 8-12 reps for major muscle group
at moderate to vigorous intensity
2-3x/week for 20-40 min of moderate to vigorous aerobic exercise plus
2x/week of resistance training of 2 sets, 8-12 reps for major muscle groups at moderate to vigorous intensity
2-3x/week for 20-40 min of moderate to vigorous aerobic exercise plus 2x/week of resistance training of 2 sets, 8-12 reps for major muscle groups at moderate to vigorous intensity
Insufficient evidence
Insufficient evidence
Insufficient evidence
           Citation: bit.ly/cancer_exercise_guidelines
Moderate intensity (40%-59% heart rate reserve or VO2 R) to vigorous intensity (60%-89% heart rate reserve or VO2 R) is recommended.
        27
9

  Exercise Goal:
• Atleast30minutes
aerobic exercise 3x/week • 2x/weekstrengthtraining • Supervised>effects
Campbell KL, et al. Exercise Guidelines for Cancer Survivors: Consensus Statement from International Multidisciplinary Roundtable. Med Sci Sport Ex 2019; 51(11):2375-2390.
          28
  Reduce Anxiety During or After Treatment
 moderate intensity aerobic training
aerobic AND resistance training
for 6-12 weeks
3 times a week 30-60 min
CV: 2-3 times a week 20-40 min Resistance: 2/week 2 sets (8-15)
for 12 weeks
Resistance training alone does NOT appear to reduce anxiety
Improvements greater when there is a supervised component
OR
         29
  Reduce Depression During or After Treatment
      moderate intensity aerobic training
aerobic AND resistance training
Resistance training alone does NOT appear to reduce depression
3 times a week 30-60 min
CV: 2-3 times / week, 20-40 min Resistance: 2 /week 2 sets (8-15)
Higher volumes of aerobic exercise (180 min) leads to better symptom reduction
For 12 weeks OR
for 6-12 weeks
Improvements greater when there is a supervised component
                   30
10

   Reduce Fatigue During or After Treatment
    moderate intensity aerobic training
      OR
OR
3 times a week 30-60 min
aerobic AND resistance training
moderate intensity resistance training
2/week
2 sets (8-15 reps)
for 12 weeks
2-3 times a week
This is particularly beneficial in prostate cancer
             31
 How Exercise Helps...
1. To regain and improve physical function, aerobic capacity, strength and flexibility.
2. To improve body image and QOL.
3. To improve body composition.
4. To improve cardiorespiratory, endocrine, neurological, muscular, cognitive and psychosocial outcomes.
5. Potentially, to reduce or delay recurrence or second primary cancer.
6. To improve the ability to physically and psychologically withstand the ongoing anxiety regarding recurrence or a second primary cancer.
7. To reduce and prevent long-term and late effects of cancer treatment.
8. To improve the physiological and psychological ability to withstand any
current or future cancer treatments.
These goals will vary according to where the survivor is in the continuum of cancer experience.
         32
 Formative Assessment
17
         33
11
